I lived in *Munich last summer. *Germany has a relaxing, slow summer lifestyle. One night, I got food poisoning and couldn't find !Tylenol to make the pain go away, they insisted I take !aspirin instead.

We met the first week of graduate school, when I gave her a ride home from a department picnic and she tested my knowledge of music, a test I failed. She was the sort of person who could draw anyone out, talk about anything, and forgive everything except pretension and pettiness. She was almost immoderately charming; she was irresistible. Go to a restaurant with her, and in five minutes she’d find out where the waitress had gone to high school. Go again, and she’d remember the name of that high school, and would pick up the conversation exactly where it had left off. Stop to get your dry cleaning with her only to discover that she knew the names of all the dry cleaner’s children and the titles of their favorite picture books, and that she’d brought along another book, as a gift. She was dauntingly brilliant and she knew when to speak up, and who for. She had as many bad girlfriends as I had bad boyfriends. She loved to eat out and hated to eat in, and if she had you over for dinner she made you pasta with tomatoes, basil, and feta. She had an opinion on any movie. She had a crush on John Cusack. She loved to run. She drank coffee at any hour. She adored Jane Smiley. She was terrible at tennis. She had thick, curly dark-brown hair and very silly eyebrows and beautiful brown eyes, and she wore glasses that she called Official D.C. Congressional Intern Eyewear—round, wire-framed—and she’d had them since the nineteen-eighties, when they were a thing, but she was too attached to them to give them up. She was possibly the funniest person I ever met.

Jane knew everyone; I really only knew Jane. She was older; I was hungrier. “I trust her with almost everything,” she’d typed about me into her computer, but there wasn’t much else about me there, which was a relief. For most of the time I knew her, in the nineteen-nineties of Bill Clinton and Catharine MacKinnon, liberalism gone wrong, feminism gone bonkers, we talked on the telephone maybe half a dozen times a day, like ladies in a nineteen-seventies sitcom, Mary and Rhoda, Maude and Vivian. We discussed lunch: tuna fish or egg salad? We talked about what we were reading: Martin Amis, Zora Neale Hurston. We compared the soundtracks of our days: Richard Thompson, Emmylou Harris. We analyzed people. “He’s a good egg,” she’d always say about someone she liked. We talked about politics, elections, the war, all wars (I was writing about war), my dog, her cat, aids, Anita Hill. There wasn’t much need to write to each other, although we once spent ages composing and revising a forty-word ad that she was determined to post in the back pages of a newspaper. It’s still lurking in her computer:

big-hearted cynic w/spiritual leanings & roving intellect

GWF, 36, Loves E. Dickinson, yoga, music, & my New York Times. Passionate, smart, and seriously funny, with a soft spot for kids and four-legged friends. Seeking similar, for friendship, maybe more.

Seeking similar, for friendship.

She tried Zoloft. She tried yoga. She kept the rain off me but it always fell on her. All I could do was write; writing was what she could not do. The year I finished my dissertation, she left graduate school and spent a year at an ashram. “It’s as if I am looking at my work through the wrong end of binoculars,” she wrote to me, after we started e-mailing. I found on Cooper the hard drive a file called “future visions,” from 1995, a picture of what she imagined for herself in two years’ time: “Clearly arrived somewhere, or at the very least, well on the path to getting there.” She wanted to finish her dissertation. She wanted to become a writer. She wanted to have children.

How do you do it? people sometimes ask me, people often ask me, people always ask me. And why: Why the books? Why the babies? Why the essays? Why so many, why so fast? What’s the rush? Where’s the fire? Jane is the how, the why, the rush, and the fire. She never got to do any of the things we both wanted. Only I did.

I found a file of commonplaces, her favorite thoughts typed out in one long poem. Virginia Woolf: “Wander no more, I say; this is the end.” T. S. Eliot: “I said to my soul, be still.” By 1997, when she hoped to have arrived somewhere or, at the very least, to be on the path to getting there, she hadn’t. She’d fallen into another depression. “I can’t imagine spending my life fighting this,” she e-mailed me. And, as it turned out, she didn’t have to.

A folder labelled “cancer stuff” contained a file called “treatment options,” with this list: cord-blood transplantation; mixed chimeric/mini-transplant—Cytoxan up front, ATG, radiation to the thymus; chemotherapy—azacitidine; full mismatched related transplant—full-body radiation, course of idarubicin/Ara-C preparatory to infusion of donor cells; haplo-identical transplant, T-cell depleted, full course of chemo and radiation. Those were her very rotten choices.
